Page 1

Syllabus
Fall 2013

Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow
Class Web Site: http://www.uwosh.edu/facstaff/gutow/physical-chemistry-1
Course Overview: Physical chemists and physicists make extensive use of mathematical models
to   describe   natural   phenomena.     The   underlying   assumption   is   that   the   universe   has   an
organization that can be expressed as a function of certain parameters. This semester we will
concentrate on developing the models that describe the bulk thermodynamic and equilibrium
properties of matter.  We will make the connection between the microscopic (molecular level)
properties of substances and these bulk properties using results from quantum mechanics.
You should be able to use these models to predict the behavior of matter.   This means both
estimating the range in which a measurement will fall and solving mathematical story problems,
using approximations where valid.  A summary list of the models and the types of systems to
which you should be able to apply them is at the end of this syllabus. 
Laboratory experiments will illustrate concepts being discussed in lecture and familiarize you
with many of the tools used by physical chemists. The tools you will learn to apply include the
chemical literature; written and oral communication; mathematical functions; error analysis; and
mechanical and electronic equipment such as vacuum pumps and computers.
Required Texts:  Cooksy,  Physical Chemistry  (2 volume set,  Thermodynamics  and  Quantum

Mechanics).

Barrante, Applied Mathematics for Physical Chemistry, 3rd edition.

Required   Equipment:   bound   duplicating   laboratory   notebook,   pen   (for   writing   in   lab
notebook), scientific calculator and goggles. 
Prerequisites:  three   semesters  of   calculus  (Calc  III  may  be  concurrent),  two   semesters   of
calculus based physics (second semester may be concurrent).
Class times: Lectures: MWF 9:10  10:10 (HS 367); Lab (HS-428):  M 1:50  5:10 (sec 1),  T
1:20  4:30 (sec 2).
Office Hours: Dr. Gutow (HS-412): MWF 10:20-11:20, TTh 9:30-10:30 or by appointment.
Reading Assignments and Homework will cover a week or two and will have parts due at the
beginning of each class meeting.  Assignments will not be accepted late, but some of your lowest
scores will be dropped.

Reading Assignments  will come primarily from the textbook.   Other sources will be
used as necessary.
Homework  will be due for each class and consist of three sections of one or more
questions each.  The first two sections will focus on material we will be discussing during
the class meeting for which the assignment is completed.

Critical Thinking Exercises/Discussion Questions:  The questions are designed
to help you learn how to use the textbook and other reference sources to prepare
for class.   For example, you might be asked to find definitions, compare two
models and explain when it is appropriate to use each or work through some
what if calculations.  
Practice Exercises: These will come primarily from the exercises at the end of
the chapter.   The goal is to help you figure out what you need to ask about in
class.
Problems: These problems will be a little more challenging and based on material
discussed in the previous class. 

Page 2

3 x 200 pts

25%
50%
25%
100%

Syllabus
Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow
Fall 2013
Exams:  There will be 220 available points on each exam.  However, exams will be scored out of
200 points (20 pts of extra credit distributed throughout the exam). The exams will be written to
be completed in one hour, but you will be given unlimited time. The material requires that exams
be cumulative, but primary emphasis will be on the chapters covered since the previous exam.
The goal of this course is not to memorize formulas, but to learn how to use models to make
predictions.   You will be provided with an equation sheet for each exam consisting of the
fundamental equations of each model. Additionally, you will be allowed to bring a 3 x 5 card
of handwritten notes to the exam.   There will also be a 90 minute laboratory exam (see the lab
section of the syllabus for more details).
Grading:  
Homework & in class worksheets: 
Exams: 
Lab:
Total:
Grade Cutoffs: A/A- > 87%, B+/B/B- > 77%, C+/C/C- > 67%, D+/D > 60%, F  60%.  The
cutoffs will not be adjusted upwards, but the instructor reserves the right to lower them.
Additional Resources:
WEB RESOURCES:   This syllabus, copies of homework assignments and answer keys will be
available at the course web site.   The course web site may be accessed by starting at the
instructor's home page: http://www.uwosh.edu/facstaff/gutow, or by following the direct link at
the top of the syllabus. Problem sets and answer keys will be password protected.  If you are
registered for the class you will be able to use your  campus login  to access the password
protected parts of the site.
CLASS DISCUSSION LIST: A private Google group has been set up for this class.  Registering
for the class adds you to the group.  This e-mail discussion group will be used by the instructor to
distribute notices and links to assignments.  You should use this group to ask questions of fellow
students.  The instructor monitors the list and will try to address any unanswered questions after
48   hours.  
  If   you   want   to   access   the   group   on   the   web   the   direct   link   is:
https://groups.google.com/d/forum/uwo_chem370f13.
SYMBOLIC MATH PACKAGES:  These can help you do algebra and calculus.  The open source
SAGE math package is available on the Chem SAGE Server
    , on the computers in P-Chem lab
and can be downloaded from the SAGEmath web site and installed on your personal computer.
Information on user accounts on the Chem SAGE Server will be provided in class. MAPLE is
available on the computers in the open access labs in Halsey.
TEXTS: The following books are on reserve in in the Halsey Resource Center (HS-289).  You
may find it useful to see difficult concepts described a number of ways.  Homework assignments
will suggest sections of these texts to look at for additional help.

 

 Contains good descriptions of statistical mechanics without

Barrante, Applied Mathematics for Physical Chemistry QD455.3.M3 B37.  A good review of
chemical applications of graphing and calculus.
Barrow,  Physical Chemistry. 
detailed quantum mechanics.
Warren,   The Physical Basis of Chemistry, QD475.P47.  This book has nice simplified, but
accurate, descriptions of many of the quantum, spectroscopic and thermodynamic concepts
we will discuss.
Nash,  Elements of Statistical Thermodynamics, QC311.5.N3.   This is a little pamphlet that
very lucidly develops the underlying concepts of Statistical Thermodynamics.

Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow
Lecture Schedule:
Topic (text sections: VOLUME.CHAPTER)

Page 3

Lectures

Syllabus
Fall 2013

I. Statistical Mechanics of Gases

Intro/Historical Background (T.1)
Intro to quantum and statistical mechanics (T.2)
Partitioning energy (T.3)
Molecular Interactions (T.4, Q.10 Q.12)
Review
Exam 1 (Unit I)

9/4
9/6, 9/9, 9/11, 9/13
9/16, 9/18, 9/21, 9/23
9/25, 9/27, 9/30
10/2
October 3 or 4, 2013 (Th or F)

II. Thermodynamics & Statistical Mechanics

Heat Capacities (T.7)
First Law (T.8)
Second Law, Third Law and Mixing (T.9)
Review
Exam 2 (Unit II)

10/7, 10/9, 10/11, 10/14
10/16, 10/18, 10/21, 10/23
10/25, 10/28, 10/30, 11/1
11/4
November 5 or 6, 2013 (T or W)

III. Thermodynamics of Equilibria, Mixtures and Reactions

Phase Transitions (T.10) 
Solutions (T.11)
Reactions (T.12)
Review
Exam 3 (Unit III)

11/8, 11/11, 11/13, 11/15
11/18, 11/20, 11/22, 11/25
12/2, 12/4, 12/6, 12/9
12/11
December 12 or 13, 2013 (Th or F)

Laboratory

Laboratory Notebooks: Notebooks should be records of everything a scientist does.  They are
used as legal evidence that an experiment was performed in patent claims and are often referred
to by other scientists working on related experiments.  Entries should be made in permanent ink.
Notes from pre-lab lectures should not be recorded in your notebook, but all calculations and
data analysis should be. A minimum checklist of what should be in your notebook will be handed
out   separately   in   class   and   is   available   on   the   class  web   site.  Pages   should   be   numbered
consecutively and a table of contents included.  Date each page as it is used and start a new page
on each day; do not tear out pages, simply draw a line through errors. Lab notebooks will be
checked each day and initialed by your instructor.   You will turn in your duplicate pages for
grading with each lab report.
Pre-lab preparation: Read the description of the experiment and any additional assignment.
The experiments are not described as a list of steps to be followed, so careful reading and
reflection before lab will be required to develop a plan for the project.   
In your notebook record a brief outline of the procedure you expect to follow and construct two
tables of information: 1) reagents; 2) equipment.  In the reagents table write the chemical name,
chemical formula, a drawing of the Lewis structure, the state in which it will be found (solid,
liquid, gas, or in solution), and hazard information from the Material Safety Data Sheet(s), which
are available online or in the stockroom.  If solutions are to be prepared, calculate the amounts
needed. 
 The equipment list only needs to list equipment.   However, you must try to make it
complete.  The list should contain every piece of glassware and equipment you think you will
need.  This includes, for example, pipets, spatulas, sensors, D/A interfaces and computers.
During lab:  Procedures actually followed should be described in your laboratory notebook. Do

Page 4

Syllabus
Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow
Fall 2013
not rely on a summary written before the lab, although you may just note deviations from your
planned   procedure.     List   lab   partners.     Include   all   experimental   observations,   data   and
calculations; you should tape in computer printouts and spectra (cut or fold to fit).  If data is
stored in computer files accurately record the data file names and which computer they are on.
Goggles and appropriate clothing (no sandals or shorts) must be worn at all times.  Failure to
wear safety goggles may result in ejection from lab and an F in the course.
Lab Reports:   Because scientists use many formats for communicating information, we will
practice a variety of report styles this semester.  

1. Formal laboratory reports

 : Your reports should be written as if for publication in  The
 
Journal   of   Physical   Chemistry.     Assume   that   your   readers   have   studied   physical
chemistry but are not familiar with your handouts.  A sample lab report is available on the
 You   will   be   required   to   use   proper  ACS   formatting   for  your
class   web   site. 
references   this   semester   (examples   are   given   immediately   below).  Additional
recommendations on word choice, grammar, reference format, notation and nomenclature
may be found in The ACS Style Guide, J. S. Dodd, Ed. (QD8.5.A25) which is on reserve
in the Halsey Resource Center.
 Journal Article: Ref#. Authors Journal Title Year, volume, pages.

1. Maniero, A. M.; Acioli, P. H.; Silva, G. M. E.; Gargano, R. Chemical Physics 

Letters 2010, 490, 123-126.

 Book Section: Ref#. Authors In Book Title; Editors, Ed.; Publisher: City, Year; pages.

1. Hiatt, R. In Organic Peroxides; Swern, D., Ed.; Wiley-Interscience: New York, 

 Web Reference: Ref#.  Authors, Title Year, Link accessed Date.

1. Gutow,

  J.

  H .

 Dr.

  Gutow's   Atomic   Orbital

  Viewer

http://www.uwosh.edu/faculty_staff/gutow/Orbitals/Cl/Cl_AOs.shtml
Jan. 14, 2011.

 2006,
  accessed

3. Poster presentation

2. Feature article for a newsmagazine

 
 :  This is aimed at the general public so should connect
the   experiment   to   more   common   experiences.     The   length   should   be   two   to   three
typewritten pages plus one or two figures or graphs.  Calculations and error analysis are
not to be part of the article but should be attached for grading.  
 
 :  This is the way most scientific work is communicated at meetings.
Posters must be eye-catching and informative.  Keep text to a minimum.  You must have:
a title, authors name, an introduction, a body (consisting mostly of tables and figures
with appropriate captions), a conclusion and references.  Error analysis is not to be part of
the poster but should be turned in for grading.
 
 : Over the course of the semester groups of students will work to prepare a 10
minute presentation on one laboratory.  The instructor will assign a topic and a date for
the oral presentation for each group. Each group member will present a part of the report
(Introduction,   Experimental,   Results/Discussion)   The   time   limit   means   it   will   be   a
summary of the material in a formal report. 
 Computer projections  should be used as
visual aids.
 
 :  Articles published in the literature are reviewed by anonymous reviewers.
5. Peer Review
Articles are only published after the reviewers are satisfied that they are accurate, well
written and a new contribution to the scientific body of knowledge.   Most articles are
rewritten at least once in response to reviewers comments.  Often additional experiments

4. Oral report

 Book: Ref#. Authors Book Title; Publisher: City, Year; pages.

1. Adamson, A. W. Physical Chemistry of Surfaces; 5 ed.; John Wiley & Sons: New 

1971; Vol. 2, p 1-151.

York, 1990; p 7-11.

Page 5

Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow

Syllabus
Fall 2013
are also done.   You will review two of your peers formal lab reports for each formal
report that is due and rewrite your reports based on the reviews returned to you.

Students may discuss the write-up and calculations with each other but every student must turn
in an individual report. Reports must be typed or computer word processed.  Use of computers
for data plotting and analysis is encouraged as is reference to the chemical literature for accepted
values.
Reports   will   be   graded   as   follows:     9   points   on   writing  including   a  comparison   with   the
literature, 10 points on calculations including error analysis, 1 point for literature search.  A copy
of the grading rubric for formal reports is attached to this syllabus. The criteria are:  

2.

1. Does the report contain all the sections (abstract, introduction, experimental method,

results, discussion)?  Is the information logically distributed among the sections?  
Is sufficient information given in experimental methods for another physical chemistry
student to repeat the experiment without referring to your handouts?

3. Have all the discussion questions been answered? 
4. Are the spelling and grammar correct?   Is verb tense consistent (present or past)? In
general past is appropriate unless referring to data presented in the report.  Is the voice
correct?  Most scientific articles are in the passive voice.  For example: instead of, "we
did the experiment three times," write, "the experiment was done three times."  Note that
the implied "by _____" is left out.
Is   the   formatting   correct   (margins,   page   numbers,   double   spaced,   figure   and   table
numbers and format, reference format...)?

6. Are the equations used in calculations included?  Are there any errors in the calculations?

5.

Are the significant figures carried correctly?  Are the error estimates reasonable?

7. Was a literature search performed?   Is a copy of  the  SciFinder title, abstract and
reference page found in the search attached.   You may use the references supplied in
handouts or the text for actual comparison, but you must perform a literature search using
SciFinder or another database and provide at least one abstract found this way from an
appropriate reference. 

 

The reviews will be due the lab day after the reports were originally due.   You may rewrite
reports based on the reviews. If you turn in the rewritten report within one week of getting the
reviews, the grade will be recalculated as the mean average of the original and rewritten reports.
A copy of one of your reports, the best, will be kept for your student portfolio.  Thus you should
     In an effort to save trees and facilitate reviews you will be
 
rewrite at least one report. 
 
  web sites.  You must upload a copy to the class
turning in the reports electronically to 
 TWO 
 
 
D2L dropbox and one to the P-chem report web site.  Turn in a
 n    electronic copy of your
 
 
 
report to each web site before class. Detailed instructions will be provided in class.  Reviews of
classmates reports are worth 2 points each.
Reports are due before class the week following completion of the project.  Late reports will be
marked down 10%/day. Incomplete reports will be returned and the late penalty assessed.
Laboratory Exam: There will be a 90 minute final exam based on work done in lab.  You will
be able to refer to your textbooks, lab reports, and lab notebooks on the exam.  The 90 minutes
allotted for the exam will not be enough to figure out what you did from your text and your lab
reports.  You will only have enough time to use them as references to get constants, formuli and
relationships correct.  You will need to review your laboratory reports and correct any mistakes
you made in order to do well on this exam.  You will also be responsible for material from the
prelabs and assigned reading.   Two non-graded problem sets will be distributed during the
semester to assist your preparation for the exam.

Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow
Grading:  

Page 6

Syllabus
Fall 2013

6 x 5   =
6 x 5   = 
6 x 2   =
6 x 20  = 
1 x 10  =
1 x 10  =

10 library worksheet
30 pre-laboratory preparation
30 laboratory notes
12 reviews of reports
120 laboratory reports (includes posters and article)
10 oral report
10 statistical mechanics worksheet
78 final exam 
300 points total

Lab Schedule:

Written

Week Due
Review

Rewrite Oral

Week of
9/9
9/16
9/23
9/30

Project
Library Assignment
Real and Ideal Gases
Real and Ideal Gases (continued) 9/30 (formal)
Statistical Mechanics Worksheet

9/16 (Data Sheet) -
-
-
10/7
-

-

-
-
10/14
-

Rotate through 2 labs (Heat of Combustion, Solution Calorimetry)

Comb/Sol'n
Comb/Sol'n (continued)
Sol'n/Comb
Sol'n/Comb (continued)

-
10/21 (formal)
-
11/4 (poster)

-
10/28
-
-

-
11/4
-
-

Rotate through 2 labs (Partial Molar Volume, Refractometry and Viscometry)

PMV/RV
PMV/PMV
RV/PMV
Electrochemistry 
Electrochemistry (continued)

-
11/18(formal)
11/25 (poster)
-
12/9(article)

-
11/25

-
12/2

-
-

-
-

90 min Lab Exam (exact time to be arranged)

10/7
10/14
10/21
10/28

11/4
11/11
11/18
11/25
12/2
12/9

-
-
10/14
-

-
11/4
-
11/18

-
12/2

-
-

Assessment of Learning:   As  part   of   the   department's   assessment   of   its   majors  program,
evidence will be added to your portfolios to demonstrate your ability to do a number of things.
From Lecture:

1. describe the structure and composition of matter;
2. apply theoretical and mechanistic principles to the study of chemical systems employing

both qualitative and quantitative approaches;

3. use theories of microscopic properties to explain macroscopic behavior;
4. explain the role of energy in determining the structure and reactivity of molecules;
5. use mathematical representations of physical phenomena.

Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow
From Lab:

Page 7

Syllabus
Fall 2013

read and follow experimental protocols;

1.
2. properly set up and safely manipulate laboratory equipment;
3. plan and execute experiments, including the use of the chemical literature;
4. maintain accurate records of experimental work;
5. analyze data statistically and assess reliability of results;
6. prepare effective written scientific reports;
7. use mathematical representations of physical phenomena;
8. use and understand modern instrumentation;
9. use computers for chemical applications;
10. retrieve specific information from the chemical literature;
11. work cooperatively in problem solving situations.

Models you will learn to apply:
Models
Gas Laws
-Ideal
-van der Waals
-Virial Expansion
Kinetic Molecular Theory
Quantum Mechanics

Classical Thermodynamics
-fugacity/activity
-Maxwell Relations
-Colligative Properties

Statistical Thermodynamics

Be able to apply to
Pure Gases
Gas Mixtures
To simplify thermodynamic models

Gases (molecular speeds and energies)
Particle-on-a-line, Particle-in-a-box
Allowed energies (Translation, Rotation, Vibration, Electronic)
Boltzmann Distribution (most random distribution)
Reaction enthalpies, entropies and free energies (H,S, G)
Constant pressure (isobaric) phenomena
Constant temperature (isothermal) phenomena
Heat engines (adiabatic versus isothermal processes)
Equilibria (Phase, Electrochemical, Chemical)
Physical changes (phase)
Mixtures (Fp, Bp, vapor pressure and Osmotic pressure changes)
Heat capacities (Cp versus Cv)
Entropy of matter
Equilibria
Chemical reactions
Physical changes
Classical thermodynamics

Lab Report Grading Rubric on next page.

Chemistry 370: Physical Chemistry I
Dr. Jonathan Gutow

Page 8

Syllabus
Fall 2013

